---
layout: post
title: "CSCI 491: Nuclear Disasters"
tags: 491 nuclear power
---
On October 19, 2016, the Watts Bar Unit 2 reactor finished its
[final series of testing][tva-wbu2] and became the newest nuclear reactor in
commercial operation in the United States, the first in 20 years. Watts Bar
Unit 2 isn’t going to be the last nuclear reactor built in the US, 4 new
reactors are [currently under construction][reactors-planned] with 18 more 
being planned. Globally there are 60 nuclear reactors under construction and 
164 being planned. Global emphasis on power technologies with low carbon 
emissions appears to have brought about a resurgence in nuclear power. 

Nuclear energy is not a magic bullet for power generation. It has had its fair
share of accidents. Nuclear accidents generally bring invoke thoughts of
contaminated exclusion zones that will be unfit for habitation for hundreds of
thousands of years. The most recent nuclear accident, Fukushima, was most
likely responsible for the changing attitudes of the US population on nuclear
energy. For the first time a majority of Americans 
[oppose nuclear energy][nuclear-opposed]. This is not surprising, it is likely 
that the average American receives most of
their information about nuclear energy from mainstream news sources. Such
sources rarely publish routine headlines about nuclear power plants operating
properly. Civil infrastructure in general only makes the news when there has
been an accident. As a result, nuclear energy only appears in the media when
there has been a disaster, most likely leading to a misinformed American public.

After a nuclear disaster, the disaster is thoroughly investigated and the 
findings are documented. Understanding why the disaster occurred is essential 
to ensure the same disaster won’t occur again. This is common sense, but when 
dealing with potentially dangerous nuclear material, it is essential that 
mistakes are not repeated. If a disaster occurred once, it logically follows 
that without any changes, the same disaster could occur again. Therefore, these 
investigations and the subsequent reports are essential to reactor operators, 
letting them know what actions their employees may be taking are dangerous. In 
this case learning from example is much better than learning from experience.

Over the next several weeks, I will examine the worst historical nuclear 
disasters. Fundamentals of nuclear energy must be covered to give one a base 
point for understanding what can go wrong. After the background of how a 
nuclear power plant works has been laid some of the early nuclear accidents 
will be presented. Early accidents occurred during scientists’ experiments radioactive materials and show us the dangers that these materials pose. Once 
one understands those things, one can begin to dissect nuclear disasters, 
primarily by sifting through the disaster investigation reports. I will cover 
three major disasters: Chernobyl, Three Mile Island, and Fukushima. Each 
disaster had a different set of factors that contributed to its development and 
each has a different resolution. I hope to cover the entire timeline of the 
plants, from the time of the disaster up to the present. I feel this 
segmentation provides one the best chance to understand a comprehensive summary 
of nuclear disasters without making the entirety of this series feel too glum. 
If nuclear energy is going to be used more in the future, knowing what went 
wrong may make all of us a little safer.

To understand nuclear disasters one must first understand how a nuclear power 
plant generates electricity.  



[tva-wbu2]: https://www.tva.com/Newsroom/Watts-Bar-2-Project
[reactors-planned]: http://www.world-nuclear.org/information-library/facts-and-figures/world-nuclear-power-reactors-and-uranium-requireme.aspx
[nuclear-opposed]: http://www.gallup.com/poll/190064/first-time-majority-oppose-nuclear-energy.aspx
