---
layout: post
title: "CSCI 491: Three Mile Island"
tags: 491 nuclear power
---

The worst commercial nuclear accident in the United States occurred at the
Three Mile Island Nuclear Generating Station near Middletown, Pennsylvania. The
incident occurred on March 28, 1979 and was rated with a severity of level 5 on
the [International Nuclear Event Scale][scale] (INES). The INES is a 7-level
logarithmic scale for measuring the severity and impact of nuclear accidents.
Chernobyl, which was examined last week was rated a 7 on this scale. A level 5
accident means there was damage to the reactor but little radiation release.
What caused this accident?

{% include figure.html img="/assets/threemileisland-air.jpg" title="Three Mile Island from the air" caption="Figure 1: Three Mile Islands from the air. Reactor 2 is on the left." %}

The [Three Mile Island (TMI) accident][report] started around 4:00 am on March
28, 1979. The main pumps that provide water to the reactor have automatically
shut down. The reactor quickly heats the water within the core and causes
pressure within the reactor vessel to increase. Increased pressure
automatically opens a valve to lower the pressure to allow water to more easily
be pumped into the reactor. This valve is connected to a
[solenoid][solenoid-valve], which is connected to a light in the control room
to indicate to reactor operators if the valve is opened or closed. When
powered, the solenoid opens allowing flow through the valve. The light only
indicates if the solenoid is receiving power and not the actual position of the
valve. If the valve were to become stuck open while depowered the light would
indicate that the valve has been closed. The valve became stuck and allowed
large quantities of steam to rush out of the reactor vessel. Reactor operators
believe the indicator light indicates that the valve is definitively closed. As
water turns to steam, pressures within the reactor vessel increase leading
reactor operators into believing that there is too much water within the
vessel. Operators drastically reduce the amount of water flowing to the
reactor. Confusion throughout the rest of the day makes it difficult for
reactor operators and off site technicians to figure out the exact state of the
reactor. Eventually at 7:50 pm, the reactor is brought back up to normal
operating pressure and one of the main cooling pumps is restarted, allowing
cooling water to flow through the reactor. By this point the reactor vessel is
full of explosive hydrogen and partially melted fuel. Through incredible luck
and good reactor design, TMI reactor 2 did not explode or release large
quantities of fission products into the atmosphere.

{% include figure.html img="/assets/threemileisland-core.jpg" title="TMI reactor 2 Core graphic" caption="Figure 2: Three Mile Island reactor 2 core visualized after fuel melted." %}

Ultimately studies found little increase in radiation in the areas around the
TMI plant despite anecdotal evidence of radiation exposure in livestock.
Luckily TMI didn’t irradiate a large portion of the United States in the same
way Chernobyl irradiated large areas of Europe. Today, TMI reactor 2 remains
permanently shut down, having been defueled and all coolant water disposed of.
TMI reactor 1 continues to generate power until its license expires in 2034. At
the end of TMI reactor 1’s license both reactors will be
[decommissioned][decommissioning], requiring safe long-term storage of
radioactive materials from both reactors. The TMI accident is a reminder that
when interfacing with complex machinery, operators need to understand every
aspect of the indicators. Reactor operators need to be able to take information
from multiple indicators and determine the best course of action similar to a
pilot flying a plane.

Now we move to the most modern nuclear disaster, that occurred on March 11,
2011 at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant. What was the chain of events
that caused one of the largest power generating stations in the world to
experience such a catastrophic failure?


[scale]: http://www-ns.iaea.org/tech-areas/emergency/ines.asp
[report]: http://www.threemileisland.org/downloads/354.pdf
[solenoid-valve]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solenoid_valve
[decommissioning]: https://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/fact-sheets/decommissioning.html
