---
layout: post
title: "CSCI 491: Chernobyl"
tags: 491 nuclear power
---

On April 28, 1986, Cliff Robinson and his colleagues [repeatedly set off a
radiation detector][sweden] between the controlled and uncontrolled areas at
the Forsmark reactor in Sweden. The radiation readings confused the team
working at the power plant, their plant was operating exactly as expected—there
was no way the radioactive cesium-137 they were detecting could have been
emitted from their plant. Other nuclear power plants in Sweden combined their
results and traced the radioactive plume back to its origin: Chernobyl in
modern Ukraine.

{% include figure.html img="/assets/chernobyl-plume.gif" title="Chernobyl Radiation Plume Map" caption="Figure 1: Chernobyl Radiation Plume" %}

The Chernobyl disaster started [during a test of a backup safety
system][chernobyl-report]. Nuclear reactors continue to generate heat after
they are shut down as the fission products decay to inert elements. In the
event of power loss, the Chernobyl reactor plant would have to wait a minute
before backup diesel generators could provide power to the cooling system. This
delay was considered unacceptable so a new system was theorized. The new system
would use the kinetic energy in the steam turbines to power the cooling system
until the generators could. As part of the test, reactor #4’s output was
decreased from 3000 MW to 700 MW. Hours later xenon poisoning brought the
reactor to a nearly shutdown state unacceptable for the test. To bring reactor
power up to the level required for the test nearly all of the control rods were
withdrawn from the reactor. The reactor power climbed rapidly and operators
attempted an emergency shutdown of the reactor. It was too late; the control
rods could not halt the fission reactions within the reactor and the reactor
exploded.

{% include figure.html img="/assets/chernobyl-4.jpg" title="Chernobyl reactor from air" caption="Figure 2: Chernobyl reactor #4 after the explosion. Intense radiation causes the image to be grainy." %}

The explosion destroyed the containment vessel around the reactor, ejecting
graphite into the Chernobyl reactor site. The core of the reactor caught fire
as air replaced the water that had been cooling the reactor. Over the next
several days helicopters dropped approximately 5000 tons of sand into the
reactor to extinguish the fire. The fire caused fission products like
cesium-137 to travel high into the atmosphere where they would disperse over
much of northern Europe. When the fires had been extinguished, soldiers were
brought in to shovel radioactive material from the roof of the complex back
into the reactor core. These soldiers were subjected to immense amounts of
radiation exposure. Once most of the intensely radioactive material was back in
the reactor a sarcophagus was constructed, sealing the reactor from the outside
world once again.

{% include figure.html img="/assets/chernobyl-sarcophagus.jpg" title="Original Chernobyl Sarcophagus" caption="Figure 3: The original sarcophagus." %}

In December of 2000, the last reactor at the Chernobyl plant was shut down
signaling the end of power generation at the Chernobyl site. The three
remaining reactors are expected to be decommissioned as radiation levels at the
Chernobyl plant continue to decline. In September 2010 construction began on
the [New Safe Confinement][nsc] (NSC) project to replace the aging hastily
built sarcophagus currently containing the reactor. In November of 2016 the NSC
was [moved into place][november-nsc] and sealed in the entirety of the old
sarcophagus. NSC is the largest structure to ever be moved on land. NSC is
projected to survive for a minimum of 100 years and will allow the dismantling
of the old sarcophagus contained within.

{% include figure.html img="/assets/chernobyl-nsc.jpg" title="New Safe Confinement" caption="Figure 4: New Safe Confinement installed on Chernobyl reactor #4" %}

Next week I will look at Three Mile Island, the worst accident in the United
State’s commercial nuclear power plant operating history. After the Three Mile
Island incident, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission increased regulation
increasing the safety of commercial nuclear plants in the US.

[sweden]: http://sverigesradio.se/sida/artikel.aspx?programid=2054&artikel=4468603
[chernobyl-report]: http://www-pub.iaea.org/mtcd/publications/pdf/pub913e_web.pdf
[nsc]: http://www.ebrd.com/what-we-do/sectors/nuclear-safety/chernobyl-new-safe-confinement.html
[november-nsc]: http://www.ebrd.com/news/2016/unique-engineering-feat-concluded-as-chernobyl-arch-has-reached-resting-place.html
